Assumptions

1. The growth of the middle class is the only driver of the increase in demand for clothing, and this relationship is linear.
The middle class is defined by many scholars as ‘households spending $11 -110 per day per person in 2011 purchasing power parity’ (Kharas, 2018). It is the fastest growing category of spending, with five people joining every second (Kharas 2018). Given the rapid growth of this class and the fact that the defined threshold of the middle class allows for spending on non-essential goods, the middle class accounts for ‘two-thirds of household consumption’ (Kharas, 2018). Because of this, we assume that the increasing size of the middle class is the only driver for an increase in the demand for clothing. We argue that basing our consumption model on the estimated size of the middle class population is more reasonable than basing it on the size of the global population, since the later scenario would not inform us on the spending capabilities of the individuals in the population. 

2. The fashion industry increases clothing production directly proportionally to an increase in the demand, which increases proportionally to the size of the global middle class population (see assumption 1).
The fashion industry produces significantly more items of clothing than are actually bought each year and therefore is arguably not maximizing its efficiency. In fact, in 2018, 30% of the 150 billion garments produced were never sold (Rudenko, 2018). Despite this, in our model we assume that the fashion industry increases the number of garments produced yearly directly proportional to the size of the global middle class. 

3. Individuals satisfy their clothing demand solely by buying cotton t-shirts and denim jeans, with a ratio of twice as many t-shirts to jeans.
Our final assumption is the least realistic. In Part A, we estimated the environmental impacts of producing one cotton T-shirt and the impacts of producing a pair of denim jeans. Since we were unable to find data on the amount of T-shirts and/or pairs of jeans produced annually, Assumption 3 is essential. It allows us to apply the aforementioned values of the environmental impacts of these items of clothing to the data we have on the industry-wide demand for clothing (based on the size of the middle class). The reason why we selected the ratio ‘twice as many t-shirts to jeans,’ because T-shirts are typically cheaper and are produced in greater variety than jeans, resulting in people typically owning more pairs of T-shirts than jeans.
