Literature Review
We are going to be looking at two opposing styles of manufacturing clothes in the fashion industry: sustainable versus traditional methods of production — the latter being by far the most common. Sustainable fashion comes under the ‘slow fashion movement’ which focuses on values such as using ‘environmentally friendly materials’ and a circular production model (Henninger, Alevizou and Oates 2016). Traditional methods of clothing production, on the other hand, operate in a ‘largely linear model of production, sale, use and disposal’ (Pal and Gander 2018, p.253). This current model of clothing production has serious impacts on the environment, as ‘non-renewable resources are extracted to produce clothes that are often used for only a short period’ (The Ellen McArthur Foundation 2017, p.19). We will be looking at the environmental impacts of these production methods mainly in terms of water consumption, Greenhouse Gas emissions and hazardous chemical waste.

These traditional production methods are not only unsustainable but extremely damaging to the environment. The Ellen McArthur Foundation published a report highlighting the details of the environmental damage done. When an individual buys a t-shirt from one of the countless retailers using traditional production methods, the real cost of the item exceeds the price tag. The environmental costs include the fashion industry’s use of ’93 billion cubic metres of water annually’ which creates ‘problems in water-scarce regions’ (The Ellen MacArthur Foundation 2017, p.20). Additionally, the treatment of textiles through dyeing processes creates toxic wastewater. Currently ‘20% of industrial water pollution globally’ comes from the textiles industry (The Ellen MacArthur Foundation 2017, p.21). The exploitation of water is not the only issue, the status quo for fashion production also releases a large amount of Greenhouse Gases into the atmosphere. In 2015 alone, ‘1.2 billion tonnes of CO2 equivalent’ were produced, which is more than the emissions from ‘international flights and maritime shipping combined’ (The Ellen MacArthur Foundation 2017, p.20). The rapidly increasing global population — and in particular the growing size of the global middle class — are estimated to raise the fashion industry’s demand such that the industry’s carbon dioxide emissions would consequently rise ‘by more than 60% to nearly 2.8 billion tons per year by 2030’ (The Pulse of the Fashion Industry 2017, p.11). The fashion industry needs to drastically change in order to reduce its environmental impact, however, how best to do this is still under debate. 

Considering the rapid increase in climate change over the last decades, mitigating the environmental impacts of this industry has been a focus of many large-scale corporations, charities and grassroots campaigners.The UN environmental programme in 2018 suggested there is ‘a fundamental problem with the fast fashion business model where revenues are based on selling more products.’ To fix this, the UN is encouraging ‘an industry-wide push for action to reduce fashion’s negative social, economic and environmental impact and turn it into a driver for the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals.’

Greenpeace launched a campaign of ‘detoxing the clothing industry’. The aim of the campaign was to ‘achieve zero discharges of hazardous chemicals by 2020’ and a blacklist of dangerous chemicals was introduced (Cobbing and Vicaire, 2018 p.5). The participating fashion brands, including big names such as H&M and Nike, committed to phasing out the use of the blacklisted chemicals as well as frequent wastewater testing (Cobbing and Vicaire 2018, p.26).

The Ellen McArthur foundation report: ‘A New Textiles Economy’ suggests there is too much focus on simply ‘reducing the impact of the current linear system’, when rather the focus should be on tackling the ‘root cause of the systems wasteful nature’ (2017 p.22). The report sets out ‘4 ambitions’ which includes taking actions such as ‘[phasing] out substances of concern’ and ‘[breaking] free from [clothing’s] increasingly disposable nature’ (2017. p.23-25). This approach is meant to encourage brands to redesign their current supply chains and production processes to make them more sustainable at their core.

Pal and Gander additionally propose that creating a ‘sustainable business model,’ requires a transition away from the existing linear model, to a ‘circular model of reuse and reintegration’ (2018). This model focuses on 1) ‘narrowing the resource loop’ so that fewer natural resources are used, 2) ‘slowing the resource flow’ by emphasising reusing and repair of items and 3) ‘attempting to close resource flows’ by finding sustainable alternatives (Pal and Gander 2018). This offers a more practical approach to reducing resource consumption, in contrast to the UN’s rather vague goals of ‘[reducing] fashion’s negative social, economic and environmental impact.’

The fashion industry suffers from a rising trust deficit. Transparency has become an important issue further upstream in the supply chain, with consumers increasingly concerned about issues including fair labour, sustainable resourcing, and the environment. The rising number of sustainable fashion brands indicates a rising awareness among consumers who want to support brands that are doing good in the world (Balchandani, et al. 2019).

Several clothing companies have incorporated sustainability at the core of their brand philosophy, designing their supply chain, distribution and products to reflect this. In particular, the brand Nu-In through their transparent website set out their sustainable methodology. They emphasize using recycled and organically grown materials such as cotton and polyester. This not only produces less waste but is also water saving. the brand also reduces their water use and carbon dioxide emissions by using the ‘latest water saving washing technology’ and ‘state of the art laundry facilities.’

The pioneering efforts of such fashion brands in transitioning the industry towards a sustainable fashion revolution are vital to reducing the industry’s immense environmental costs. These brands are pushing the boundaries of clothing production technology through scientific innovation, such as Pangaia’s creation of Grape Leather sneakers to replace the highly polluting production of traditional leather, thus leading the way for other brands to follow suit. However, we realise that many brands are entirely ignoring or too-slowly implementing the recommendations of organisations such as the UN to transition to sustainable production methods. It is a shift in consumer demand that can effectively motivate fashion brands to change. This is why this project aims to understand and estimate to what extent consumer’s only buying from “sustainable” clothing brands could reduce the fashion industry’s environmental costs. With this project we hope to visually and numerically encourage individuals to buy sustainably produced clothing.
