#Provide context and motivation 
Compare fashion brands and traditional models of production
Our idea centres around the recent trend of ‘sustainable’ fashion. Traditional models of production used by retailers who do not identify as sustainable have been criticised as damaging to the environment. However, our aim is to uncover if sustainable fashion brands are achieving what they claim in reducing the impact of clothing production on the environment and also how significant a transition to only buying sustainable clothing would be on the environment. 




#Suggest/sketch methods for analysis/processing of data
Investigate potential correlation between average selling price and each stage of supply chain practices e.g. carbon footprint(statistica), sustainable cotton(statistica), visualised as a scatter plot with the line of best fit.
Fast fashion brand versus sustainable brand energy pathway in the supply chain illustrated in a sankey diagram. Calculate % of energy loss to compare between different company scales.
Rate of production of clothing; fashion industry carbon footprint over time against time illustrated as two curves on the same distribution graph.

#Suggest/sketch methods for presenting data/results
To present the results, we are planning on using different data visualizations in order to have a complete analysis of the subject. 
First of all, we will compare, in a column chart, the researched sustainable brands based on different environmental factors (CO2 emissions, water consumption, waste...). 
We will then rank the sustainable brands in a table. To conclude, we will analyze what would happen in the future if everyone switched to sustainable fashion. To visualize this, we will take an existing linear graph predicting the fashion industry’s environmental impact over the next 50 years, and add our predictions concerning the sustainable fashion’s environmental impact. 
 
#project proposal feedback key points
project proposal feedback key points:
Background - some literature of previous studies relating to this topic (including citations) - exploring the environmental impacts of different processes or materials.
Backup plan in case you do not obtain this data directly from the companies, or indeed the data you do receive is not as useful
How many companies / which companies you will choose to include?
Have a play with separate charts for the different fields e.g. CO2 / water usage rather than in the same figure as then it might be more easily comparable.
Figures that you talk about into context, for example, water savings as number of Olympic swimming pools 
What percentage of the world’s total CO2 emissions / water usage is due to the fashion industry?
What themes emerge?
