#Literature review texts and links

#Plan 
Intro: 
•	brief overview of topic and importance, include all definitions  
•	current model of manufacturing (status quo)
•	3 areas of environmental impact: water, GHG emissions and hazardous chemicals.

Methodologies used in readings to understand and evaluate impact.

Solutions suggested by the readings and evidence used to back up sustainability claims.

Conclusion 


#A New Textiles Economy: Redesigning Fashion’s Future (Ellen MacArthur)
(https://www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/publications/a-new-textiles-economy-redesigning-fashions-future) 
‘In the last 15 years, clothing production has approximately doubled’ p.18

‘current system for producing, distributing, and using clothing operates in an almost completely linear way’ p.19

‘nonrenewable resources are extracted to produce clothes that are often used for only a short period’ p.19

‘Textiles production (including cotton farming) also uses around 93 billion cubic metres of water annually,20 contributing to problems in some water-scarce regions’ p.20

‘In 2015, greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from textiles production totalled 1.2 billion tonnes of CO2 equivalent,21 more than those of all international flights and maritime shipping combined.’ P.20

‘textile production discharges 21 high volumes of water containing hazardous chemicals into the environment. As an example, 20% of industrial water pollution globally is attributable to the dyeing and treatment of textiles’ p.21

‘The Citarum River in Indonesia has over 200 textile factories along its banks; these factories release dyes and other chemicals into the water, changing the colour of the river and devastating the local ecosystem.’ P.38

‘If the industry continues on its current path, by 2050, it could use more than 26% of the carbon budget associated with a 2°C pathway.29 Moving away from the current linear and wasteful textiles system is therefore crucial to keeping within reach the 2°C average global warming limit.’ P.21

‘The number of plastic microfibres entering the ocean between 2015 and 2050 could accumulate to an excess of 22 million tonnes.’ P.39

Increased awareness of the negative environmental impacts has spurred change ‘However, most of these efforts are focused on reducing the impact of the current linear system’ 
e.g. ‘using more efficient production techniques or reducing the impact of materials’
but this isn’t ‘tackling the root cause of the system’s wasteful nature directly’
‘low clothing utilisation and… recycling’ p.22

Sets out 4 ‘ambitions’ 

1.	‘Phase out substances of concern and microfibre release’ p. 23

2.	‘Transform the way clothes are designed, sold, and used to break free from their increasingly disposable nature’ p.24

3.	‘Radically improve recycling by transforming clothing design, collection, and reprocessing’ p.24

4.	‘Make effective use of resources and move to renewable inputs’ p.25

Outcomes of increased sustainability in brands (if the followed the above ambitions)

‘Lower GHG emissions’ p. 46
‘No leakage of hazardous substances into the environment.’ P. 47
‘Reduced pressure on water in water-scarce regions’ p.47



#UN environmental program
https://www.unenvironment.org/news-and-stories/story/putting-brakes-fast-fashion 
‘The fashion industry produces 20 per cent of global wastewater and 10 per cent of global carbon emissions - more than all international flights and maritime shipping.’

‘Textile dyeing is the second largest polluter of water globally and it takes around 2,000 gallons of water to make a typical pair of jeans.’

‘there is still a fundamental problem with the fast fashion business model where revenues are based on selling more products, and therefore retailers must constantly offer new collections’

‘UN Alliance on Sustainable Fashion to encourage the private sector, governments and non-governmental organizations to create an industry-wide push for action to reduce fashion’s negative social, economic and environmental impact and turn it into a driver for the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals.’


#Greenpeace
https://www.greenpeace.org/international/press-release/17739/greenpeace-report-clothing-industry-shows-progress-in-cutting-hazardous-chemicals/
Destination zero: seven years of detoxing the clothing industry
https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-international-stateless/2018/07/destination_zero_report_july_2018.pdf

‘set up a blacklist of hazardous chemicals.’ MRSL (Manufacturing Restricted substances list) p.5
Phalates which soften plastic coatings is toxic p.12 (see other possible examples of toxic chemicals)
Some toxic chemicals unnecessary ‘gimmicks… with environmental cost’ p.6

‘the textiles industry is a major user of hazardous chemicals ‘ p.7
-	In the global south is especially bad
-	‘multicoloured rivers’ from ‘dyeing processes’
-	‘disrupt hormone systems in humans and/or animals’ – when ingesting water waste.

‘almost all Detox committed brands are wastewater testing’ p.26


#Possible literature to inform on methods/ impacts

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0959652618303056?casa_token=39O7fb4gMe8AAAAA:dGQ7AvJWAzsxYJV5DSPoyVtxJxBt7_veNDmVJqBTpospUV1kr9Zs_5OuGyuvJnQBDwSvEQXB1g

some good points e.g. ‘perhaps nontraditional operating logics and value propositions to be considered and applied. One way of doing this is to look at the flow of materials in the fashion system and shift the sector's attitude from the largely linear model of production, sale, use and disposal to a more circular model of reuse and reintegration.’ P.253
Also suggests a ‘sustainable business model’ – could search for this to find data?

