Evaluation
Like all research projects, this one has its flaws. We faced some difficulties primarily during our search for data sets. Our first intention was to compare the environmental impact of multiple sustainable brands to then rank them, investigating which were performing the best. We then wanted to compare this final ranking to a well-known fast fashion brand. After not finding much on their websites, we decided to collect data by directly contacting the brands. We emailed a dozen about our project, asking to access some data sets. We hoped they would provide data, given that most sustainable brands pride themselves transparency. However, most brands either did not respond or said they were not interested in helping us. Eventually, we got a response from nu-in, which seemed eager to help. After a few exchanged emails, they directed us to their website, where we could find data on the environmental impacts of their products – which we had already been aware of. We realised our best option was to work as a group to select and organise the data we could find from the different sources we could find online.

A challenge that came with creating a data set from multiple sources, was assuring that the units were compatible and comparable such as by converting to % basis in Sankey diagrams, and in some cases rounding values (e.g. when comparing billions to thousands). In addition, we recognised that, in order to make this project work with the limited data available, we had to make some relatively extreme assumptions (such as assumption 3: Individuals satisfy their clothing demand solely by buying cotton t-shirts and denim jeans…).

All of these challenges showed us that in a data based research project, it is essential to be able to adapt quickly and be reactive to find solutions.

Overall, we mitigated the inaccuracies resulting from our limited data as much as possible, through assumptions and rounding. This might have created uncertainty and errors in our results, but we believe our methods and approach were reasonable and well explained. Therefore, we encourage anyone who is interested in this study, to use our research and improve on these issues.
